As I was saying, the department did purchase a
birdshot, which at 2 to 3 feet is deadly, but at 20 to
30 feet is not. And at least at that point, we had
something as an alternative between the use of a
wooden stick and an absolute deadly force. We
still do not have it. Rubber bullets are available
and so forth. And certainly chemical agents are
available as a means to try to affect crowd
control. But we still do not have even developed
what I suppose one would call weapon systems that
are useful in that kind of situation in the sense of
being injurious enough to get someone's
attention, but not so injurious as to maim or kill.
OK. Did the increase of blacks and women in the
force have any impact on crowd control? MR. No, not
appreciably. Not appreciably. People, I don't
care what your background is, what your ideology
is, when you get in a crowd control situation and
you're over there in that uniform, you're a
uniform, period. The amount of solidarity and
unity is just absolutely as strong as you can
imagine in that sort of situation. Your life
depends upon the backing of someone next to you and
vice versa, and it just doesn't make much
difference. I had read an article in the U.S. News
and World Report where Cleveland hired some black
officers to go into the ghetto situations, and
they said it didn't work. Didn't, no. In fact, I
would speculate that in some situations you might
aggravate it in the sense that... those officers
might be less sympathetic or less tolerant than
what white officers might be. That's pure
speculation, I hasten to add, but it's not going to
make an enormous amount of difference. Was crowd
control or maybe just crime itself, general
crime, an issue in the 1968 campaign? And if so,
what were Nixon and Johnson's stance on the issue?
Well, it certainly was an issue in the 1968
campaign. Those were certainly
understatements, say, turbulent years of the
United States. And
looking back, I don't think that Nixon, clearly he
campaigned on very vague promises with regard to
both what he would do about situations in the black
ghettos and with regard to the Vietnam War. But
Lyndon Johnson had the unfortunate experience of
being president at the wrong time, analogous to
Herbert Hoover, who didn't create the Depression
but happened to come into office right before it
hit. And that was the situation with Lyndon
Johnson. I have a great deal of respect and
admiration for Lyndon Johnson as a president. And
I think he did probably as credible a job as anyone
in that office at that particular time could have
done. Now, he had to withdraw from the election. He
chose to withdraw, and I think he would have lost
the election had he run against Nixon, because
people were upset with the situation and were
going to vote for a change, period. And it didn't
matter. I don't believe it mattered what the
agenda of change would have been. They were voting
for an agenda of change, period, or for change,
period. Yes, it was very much an issue. And
the Democratic Party was hurt at that particular
time through its identity with social change,
with social activism, and so forth. And the mood of
the country was a mood of, let's get a handle on
this. Let's back off. Because in every instance,
of course, it's extreme situations which make the
headlines. It's extreme situations which drew
the attention of the national news media. And
in that sense, the Johnson administration was
characterized as having failed to maintain
social control. One of the things that's
relatively confusing about the era is how the
polarization tended to group several issues
together which were in essence unrelated. The
black ghetto riots, the Vietnam War protest, The
increase, the skyrocketing crime rate, which
really took off about 1963, 1962, 1963, and it was
precipitously climbing all during that era, all
got wrapped up in this law and order issue, that
there was a lack of respect for authority, that we
need to enforce the laws, that we need to maintain
order. And three, what in effect, were diverse
issues
I won't say unrelated to one another or certain
relationships, but three distinctly different
issues tended to be grouped together. And in that
sense, people would end up
voting for order, not voting against the Vietnam
protests, not voting against the plight of black
ghetto residents, but simply voting for
maintenance of order. That's what they wanted to
do. What do you think of Nixon's law and order
campaign? I know you said he was pretty vague about
it. And was it carried out after he was elected? And
how did it have an effect, if any, on crowd control?
Well, the law and order campaign, like every law
and order campaign at the federal level, is as
phony as a $3 bill. Law enforcement in this country
is fragmented. It's certainly coordinated
effort is not possible beyond the state level. And
even at that level, extremely difficult to amount
any coordinated effort. So we get president after
president in this sense. The issue of crime
control first came up the 1964 elections. Prior to
that, one is hard pressed to find reference to
crime as an issue, a national political issue. And
we have presidents running on a law and order
ticket, law and order platform. There isn't very
much they can do to affect law and order. It's a
state and local issue. Now, the one thing that was
visibly done was the creation of the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration during
the Johnson administration, which Nixon
continued, which provided federal aid to local
law enforcement programs for innovation and
development. That aid was specifically, there
were specific provisions which prohibited
local, state and local agencies from supplanting
endeavors that they were now supporting with
state or local money. So you couldn't take the
federal money and do something you were now doing
with state money. You had to do something new with
federal money. And that was a tremendous boon to
law enforcement in this country, to develop a
sophistication in law enforcement, to virtually
catapulting, I don't think it's an overstatement
to say, catapulting the police finally into the
20th century. Whenever prior to that, very
antiquated operations
did not take advantage of either recruitment
selection of high quality personnel or the
technology that's available to them. So the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, which
died during the Carter administration, was
certainly the primary factor. And we still have a
residual of that, by the way. The National
Institute of Justice still exists. And just a
month ago, President Reagan signed what's now
called the Justice Assistance Act, which will in
effect, resurrect LEAA. They don't want to say
that because... See, one of the problems with LEAA
politically was that crime did not go down. A lot of
money was pumped in. At the peak in 1973, a billion
dollar appropriation to LEAA, which went to state
and local government to help in crime control. But
the crime rates didn't drop. And so the program was
regarded as a failure. Well, it would take a long
time to get off onto this tangent, but the effect of
that sort of thing is going to take years to really
be demonstrated. And federal money was dumped on a
problem, and whenever solutions weren't
forthcoming within four or five years, there was
disillusionment set in at the federal level. That
was the primary, the whole product of the riots
which started out in the Watts section of Los
Angeles with the Vietnam protests and focusing
national attention on the police and getting the
police into the CBS evening news was undoubtedly
and unquestionably the omnibus Safe Streets and
Crime Control Act. And the only measure in that act
which made any difference at all was the federal
assistance, the money that came down. The other
provisions are empty fluff.
Can you cite anything in particular of why it
didn't work for our lawyers? on the federal
assistance? Well, crime...
The difference between the best case and the worst
case in terms of what we can do with structured
societal response to crime is probably not all
that great. First of all, crime is primarily a
product of social conditions. So if in the... I
suspect that in terms of the best case... the most
effective, most efficient criminal justice
system response possible probably makes no more
than a 20% difference in the crime rate. Now, it
took time. When that money first came down, you
literally didn't know what to do with it. I was on
the Law Enforcement Training Council during that
period of time when the money really started
flowing, 1971.
We had representatives. It was dispersed to all
the states, and then the state could disperse
within. It was a block grant program, it was
called. So the state would get a block grant, $20
million, and then the state would disperse it to
local agencies within that state, and it would be a
state agency that was responsible for that.
Representatives of the state agency came out and
visited the Law Enforcement Training Council and
said, come up with something. Give us some
training programs. We've got about $300,000 here
that we need to spend, and we're just going to go
back. And so we literally invented training
programs, quick and dirty, to get the money out. It
took time to develop the sophistication. It took
time. You didn't have in law enforcement anybody
with college degrees at that time. When I went on
the Lansing Police Department in 1967 with a
baccalaureate degree, I was the first individual
ever to go on that department, a $200 million
department that had a college degree. And in fact,
you didn't tell anybody about it. You kept quiet
about it. And so you just simply didn't have the
sophistication. You didn't have the
infrastructure in place to spend the money
effectively. About the time that the money dried
up, the Carter administration, we finally were in
a position to spend it well. And I suspect if the
money starts flowing again in substantial
amounts through the new Justice Assistance Act,
we'll do a much better job of spending it this time
than what we did the last time. OK. We've already
talked a little bit about the tough position the
policemen are in. What were the police force's
feelings during the 60s towards being ostracized
for alleged brutality and breakout riots? And did
these feelings have an effect on their
performance? Yes. Police officers were very
resentful of the hostility that was generated
against them. They truly felt like that they had
behaved in a very reserved way. which in the vast
majority of instances did occur. They
felt like they were being made scapegoats.
They felt like they were doing a basic duty in terms
of maintenance of order and were being criticized
for that. And it had an effect on performance. It
had an effect both in terms of your reaction a riot
line and in your daily contact with citizens. I
think that was an era which was very unpleasant in a
sense of police feelings of hostility towards the
community. You'd see that, you'd stop someone on a
traffic stop who had hair below their ears, and
boy,
Unpleasant exchanges may not have been
inevitable, but occurred at a high percentage of
the time. And the police certainly instigated
much of that. Walk up and say, OK, dirtbag, give me
your driver's license. You're not going to have a
pleasant contact after that. And so that
resentment was manifested both in riot
situations and in daily contacts. A lot of ill
feelings at that particular time. How did these
feelings affect the performance when they went
into the situation? Were they less hesitant to
bring out force? Yes, I think they were less
hesitant to bring out force. They made many
unnecessary arrests.
They generated hostility where none necessarily
had been generated.
We have... strong commitment to a civilian police
system in this country. I believe very, very
strongly in making a civilian police system and
recognize that on a worldwide basis, a number of
police agencies are not civilian in the sense that
we think of it as civilian. very closely aligned to
military. Even in some other democracies, they
are very closely aligned to military and, in fact,
train with military and interchange, in some
cases, interchange in terms of officer corps and
the like.
The problem with the disturbances during that era
is it militarized the police. It put them in a role
of a military force rather than a civilian force.
And the police are not prepared to deal with that.
That's a good way to put it. They're just not
prepared to deal with that. Police in the United
States are, in effect, civilians in uniform. And
as long as you maintain that, that both legal and
psychological approach to the job, you'll do
well. When you start thinking of yourself as an
occupying military force, as the police were in
the black ghettos during that period of time, in
situations in St. Louis, in Los Angeles, even in
Detroit, where They wouldn't respond to a call, a
domestic dispute, in certain areas, certain
blocks, without sending four officers. So you
send four officers in on a husband-wife dispute
where you've got to call a referee. Well, you show
up with four individuals, and yet the character of
that situation is going to change immediately
into a confrontation, hostile situation, just by
the nature of you walking the door with four guys
facing some husband who's having a, and he's maybe
half drunk, usually is, but having a dispute with
his wife, and you're not going to sit down and do
social counseling and mediation with four
officers there. Okay. Is riot control, I'm trying
to get what you think about it, is riot control a
police force's job, military, or both? well it
should first be the police force's job despite
this may sound contradictory despite everything
i've said about the police are basically
civilians the police basically are untrained or
unprepared to deal with with riots we have in fact
an absolutely outstanding record in the united
states the police dealing with riots from the
perspective of civilians not getting hurt and by
and large the police have managed to control civil
disturbance in this country without hurting
civilians i think that's part of Despite the
ineptitude, despite the lack of equipment,
despite their own psychological, their own fear
in those situations, the police, by and large,
have behaved as civilians. And the few instances
we've brought military in have not gone well. The
amount of force used is typically far more than is
necessary. Realize the police have to walk back to
that neighborhood the next day. They've got to
deal with those people on a one-to-one basis. And
they are much more hesitant to club somebody over
the head or to shoot at somebody because the next
day they could be shooting back at them. And
they're going to use a whole lot more restraint.
No, I think the police, you only call in the
military when it's virtually totally out of
control and the civilian police are no longer able
to handle it at all And that would be absolutely a
last resort, including the National Guard, by the
way, which is probably the worst to call in of
anybody. Okay. When you say they, in the past, have
a really good history, that's comparing it to
other countries? Yes, right. That's in, yeah,
it's in contrast to even other democracies where
the police have reacted with much greater force
and there have been many more, much more extensive
injuries ensued. Okay. What a, What impact over
the 60s was media? Well, there's no doubt that
media coverage of these events escalates the
violence, escalates the disturbances. I'm not
proposing news blackouts, but certainly it is
helpful to have voluntary restraint on the part of
the media in coverage of certain of these events. a
minor disturbance at a city park can become a
neighborhood-wide riot if the cameras are
immediately there and if you're broadcasting it
on the evening news and so forth. I think that
what's necessary is restraint on the part of the
media whenever disturbances are still in
progress. Now, once...
Once they've subsided, then certainly the media
can, I wouldn't propose for a minute that we don't
provide full coverage. But I do believe it's wise
to maintain some restraint while things are in
progress. It does incite. It does draw
individuals, more individuals, into the
situation. And also, do cameras have a strong
effect on how brutal the police are going to be when
they know that there's a camera right there? No, I
don't believe the cameras have a mitigating
effect on police brutality. No.
The psychology of that situation, by the time an
officer loses control and starts wailing with a
nightstick, it doesn't matter if you've got 50 TV
cameras focused in on that officer. He is... the
kind of instigation, the kind of fear that's beget
that. In his mind, he is being justified in what
he's doing, and therefore the fact that you're
taping it isn't making any difference. It's not a
situation where he's trying to commit a deviant
act that he knows he'll be sanctioned for. From the
perspective of that officer, he's justified in
doing what he's doing. Okay. Why did Hubert
Humphrey order an FBI inquiry on the Battle of
Chicago? Well... And what came about that
inquiry? I don't recall the precise results of
that inquiry. Certainly no one that I recall was
ever sanctioned in the city of Chicago for
anything they did during the Democratic
Convention riots. Not one officer. I
would defend the actions of the Chicago police as
human beings. I would not defend their actions as
an organizational entity, as a unit of
government. In that sense, Humphrey's call for an
inquiry was undoubtedly justified to the extent
that such inquiry investigates
the appropriateness of organizational
response, which was needed. Realize you had Mayor
Daley in Chicago at the time. And Daley was a
classic law and order and had made comments in the
months prior to that during some of the ghetto
disturbances in Chicago. And this is where you get
this bleeding of one incident into another.
During the ghetto disturbances in Chicago, he had
made a public comment on television I want my
officers to shoot to kill arsonists and shoot to
maim looters. Well, looters are, for God's sakes,
I don't want to sound sexist, but women and
children out there looting. There's an
excellent, Joseph Lombard's book, The New
Centurions, has a chapter or two devoted to, which
is quasi-autobiographical, by the way, has a
chapter or two devoted to the Watts Riot. And
there's an excellent scenario where a young
sergeant ends up taking control of a platoon of
seven or eight individuals, and there's a
warehouse, and there's individuals in the
warehouse, and he gets caught up in the role, and he
surrounds the warehouse, and he orders them to
surrender over the bullhorn, and then they come
parading out. And I can't quote it exactly, but
Wambaugh does a number in terms of, the first one
out was an old man with a strong limp and an old
battered trench coat. The second was a a
middle-aged woman who weighed over 250 pounds,
and a third one. And he goes on like that until you
get these looters,
these rebels. I'm trying to look for the right word
here. uh instigators of rebellion and and so forth
and what what of course the the scenario is uh he's
got his military strike force there and he's got a
pathetic lot of people uh that he's surrounded in
order to come out with their hands up and uh As the
scenario goes in the chapter, the sergeant shakes
his head and walks away. The officers are left
standing there wondering what to do. They stand
around for about five minutes, and they all walk
away, and the looters walk away. I cite that to you
because it's a
telling situation in terms of what you have.
We have never been so polarized in this country
that we didn't identify with one another.
I read in the U.S. News report, U.S. News and World
Report back in 1964, that the Army's approach to
crowd control was to first show force, second, ask
rioters to disperse, three, be in the crowd to
disperse, four, use high-pressure water hoses,
five, use tear gas, six, fire at leaders, and then
seven, fire at everybody else. What do you think
about this approach, and has it changed? And if it
has changed, what are the reasons for change?
First of all, the assumption is when you start with
a show of force, the assumption in terms of general
operating procedures is that you already have a
crowd which is considered out of control. So
preceding that, what you generally have is
minimum show of force as long as the crowd is
peaceful. You don't want to instigate them. In
terms of that sequence, once a crowd is out of
control, I don't think it's changed. That
primarily is the technique that's recommended.
The only thing I'm not quite sure of, and I don't
think you'll find in any police department
training manual, is the shooting at. You're only
going to return fire, particularly when dealing
with a crowd. The only variant of that would be that
rather than shooting leaders, arresting leaders
is generally regarded as a good tactic to go in and
attempt to arrest the leaders early on if the other
tactics don't work. I also read where a mayor
advocated a permanence to stop riots, and it
worked for him. He was quoted as saying, meet force
with superior force from the outset. to warn
people, no mercy on the lawless. Do you think it
just takes a certain kind of crowd for this to work?
Or do you think this, do you totally disagree with
this? I simply disagree with it. Gentlemen, no
mercy on the lawless. Those kind of statements are
good, classic situation of law and order
rhetoric. that out on the street doesn't get
translated. It just loses translation out on the
street. You've got the classic picture, the
photograph that made all the papers in the late
1960s during the Newark riots of the police
officer in Newark bearing down with a shotgun. You
don't see what he's shooting at, but the
commentary was he shot and killed a 12-year-old
boy running from a liquor store. That's, you know,
no mercy for the lawless. We have never had justice
without mercy. We've always had mercy and
justice. I just disagree totally with that. I
think that the business of showing force is fine,
the business of enforcing the law within the
limits of what you're able to do out and out, the
turmoil of a riot situation. And there are real
limits to that. I don't know. How much good do you do
by arresting somebody running away from the store
with a gun? A woman who lives in a black ghetto
running in, grabbing some dresses, running away
to the store, and so you'd effect an arrest. And
during the setting of a ghetto riot, whenever
everybody's looting or TVs are being carried
away, I don't know that you accomplish a thing.
Were there some changes in technique and
equipment that made the riot situations more
violent? And about when were these changes made?
I don't recall any changes that I would
characterize as making pariah situations more
violent. And as a point in fact, I think if changes
were made, they'd probably decrease the amount of
violence, not aggravated it. Do you recall any
that made them less violent?
I think to
the extent that the police were prepared to deal
with, had some sort of a backup in terms of use of
force, the bird shot as a case in point, for
example, I think that the police were more
confident. The police were less afraid that they
would have to use deadly force and therefore have
deadly force used on them. Certainly in terms of
the distribution of walkie-talkies, believe it
or not, to each officer, which were just being
distributed at that time. Now, in a ghetto
situation, that's very important to you because
you're in communication with police with other
officers and therefore again you're less afraid
you're less likely to start shooting in a
situation where you feel threatened those things
more than more than gas grenades or pepper foggers
or that sort of thing really those those items were
used relatively seldom
professor joseph layman of cal berkeley said in a
democratic society the police must be concerned
with what with doing what is most consistent with
the least amount of force. How do you feel about
this statement? Yes, I would agree with that.
We never enforce all the law all the time. And
that simply carries through to a riot situation.
In a riotous situation, it doesn't always pay to
make an arrest, even if you see a violation. You use
the least amount of force to affect control, to
maintain order. The law is not an end in and of
itself. It's a means to an end. The end is
maintaining order. And enforcement of the law is
the best means. In one situation, fine, but in
other situations, it may not be. And that's
certainly true in riot or disturbance
situations. How much of a part did police dogs play
in the change over the decades? Not very much. I
don't recall a dog being used in the state of
Michigan during any of the disturbances. And my
memory just is not good enough to tell you whether
they may have been used in disturbances
elsewhere. The image of the dogs being used in
Birmingham, Alabama during the civil rights
demonstrations
had an enormous impact. police were in fact many
departments simply have policies that forbid
even dog even departments that have dogs have
policies that forbid they're using them in crowd
control situations because they are so
inflammatory and I were I a police chief I would
absolutely forbid a dog from being used in a crowd
control situation no no reason for yes
right and at that in fact that era Steve had really
hurt what is otherwise an effective law
enforcement tool, the use of dogs. And we're still
recoiling from that era whenever dogs were used
for riot control in Birmingham and probably
elsewhere. I don't remember. I remember
specifically Birmingham, Alabama. And that
generated such hostility, such resentment
towards police dogs that many agencies don't have
them yet that should have them for purposes of
tracking, for purposes of going in a building. We
have a burglar hiding. And locating the burglar,
it's a lot safer for the officers. It's a lot safer
for the burglar, in a sense. He doesn't get a
trigger-happy officer blowing him away, then he
sees a shadow. But departments are hesitant to
have dogs because of that riot control imagery of
dogs. When was that taking place? And when did the
dogs were? That was early, early 60s. Yeah, those
civil rights demonstrations were early 60s,
particularly in Birmingham. And by the time you
had the full-scale late 60s disturbances, I don't
recall dogs being used. OK.
You've already touched on a few of the techniques,
the equipment for crowd control. With the
increased government spending on research for
crowd control devices, such as a bubbly machine,
an instant banana peel, rubber bullet,
die-bearing dart, Were they used and were they
effective? They weren't used in the late 60s. I
think most of that technology is post-1970
technology, and so by and large were not used in the
1960s. And I have
reservations about how effective any of it will
be. You've got to have it at the right place at
exactly the right time, and it's very difficult in
some cases to do that. I've gotten it out of an
article dated in 67, but I guess that was just
enough. Maybe the testing stages. Well, I stand
corrected then. They may have had them. I just
don't recall them being available to any agency. I
was on the Law Enforcement Training Council, as
you recall, in 1971, and we developed the training
modules for civil disturbances then. And I don't
remember an agency in the state of Michigan that
had any of those devices. Again, they may have, and
I just wasn't aware of it, but they certainly
weren't widespread use. So these newfangled
devices didn't change any technique or anything?
No. They weren't even used? No. Could you please
compare the differences in controlling a crowd in
64 and more than 74? If there are any differences. I
know you mentioned that psychology was one of the
biggest changes over the 60s, whereas technique
wasn't quite as much. I think we learned, I think
that decade taught the police to act with
reservation, no matter what the provocation.
That's the primary thing we learned. Now, even
given that, You had a situation in Austin in the
last 12 months where you had officers getting
carried away and whaling with the nightsticks.
But the difference there is that the minute the
subject was subdued, the nightsticks quit
flying, and it did not spread. The anger did not
spread among other officers to the point where you
had 40 or 50 nightsticks whaling. The primary
issue was learning the lesson that you're not
going to win by clubbing somebody in the head.
You're going to lose. The media's going to rack
you. You're going to be criticized. The police
chief's going to lose his job. That you're going to
lose. Out on that situation, I don't care what the
provocation, you hold your temper. Now, that's
the lesson that was really learned. And the
equipment and the formations and the techniques
are all secondary to that.
Okay. A hypothetical situation today and now, say
you were chief of police and... there was a crowd,
potential riot situation, what would your plan of
action be? Well, I think first of all to have a
minimum show of force until it was inevitable that
violence was going to occur. When violence
occurred, then move out in force and immediately
arrest the leaders, the agitators of the crowd,
remove them from the scene. Don't make mass
arrests, if you can avoid it at all. Don't make mass
arrests. Go in and grab four or five. And then
attempt to split that crowd into small groups. Mob
psychology is very real. People in that large
group and the anonymity that comes from being in
that large group. people really do behave
differently than what they will as individuals.
To the extent that you can get them in small groups,
to the extent that you can get them isolated,
they'll start behaving as individuals again. And
that's the primary tactic to be used. Probably the
last question would be, I know crowd control
riots, like you said, are a big issue now because
there are very few of them. How much research for
crowd control is going on today and what do you see
in the future? I'm not aware of any research going
on in crowd control right now. There's certainly
not in terms of, in general in police circles, any
research going on in crowd control.
We have, relatively speaking, very effective
agents for fraud control right now. The banana
peel of the types of agents and so forth are fine,
but good old CS Gas has always done it for us. You hit
someone with a crab with a pepper fogger, and
they're going to move.
in terms of controlling the crowd, other than
dealing with the psychology of crowd control,
equipment is not the answer. And we know, in terms
of the approach to crowds, what the best police
psychological approach is. When we get to
equipment, then if you're going to have to
disperse that crowd of equipment, you gas them,
pure and simple. And it's highly effective. It
works. They're going to move. They're going to
run. And when they start running, you split. You
divide them. You plan ahead of time so that the...
either with wedges of officers or by the natural
configuration of the area or whatever, to start
splitting that crowd into smaller groups. And
when you do that, you'll get control of it again.
It's only in a large mob that things really get out
of control. And I don't foresee any extensive
amount of attention being paid to this. I don't
know if you've ever experienced being hit with
tear gas or not, but one time around, it makes a
believer out of you. That stuff stings, your eyes,
you no longer can see, your eyes are watering so bad
you can't see, you choke, you gag, and you don't sit
there next to a gas bomb and look at it. You move
whenever it hits. That's very effective. No
long-term injuries result from that.
I know it has a bad reputation, but after all, at
that point you're talking about We're talking
about trying to use force, which isn't going to
maim or kill. And that is effective. Is there any
other comments you'd like to add about the
questions or anything about
this interview? Do you feel we got a full one? I
think we did a pretty reasonable job. You did a very
thorough job in the interview. My compliments to
you in terms of covering the issues that exist with
regard to the problem.
I would just, I would add something as just a matter
of underscoring that I've already said, and that
is that the primary dynamic is police fear. And if
you can prevent the police, to the extent, you
can't prevent the police from being afraid, but to
the extent you can give police confidence, you'll
maintain structured, reasoned response to crowd
control. When the police are, when the police go
out of control is when the police fear is out of
control. I don't think the Chicago police on that
Wednesday night in Chicago rioted because they
hated the demonstrators. I think they rioted
because they were afraid for their personal
safety and for the safety of their families. And
they were going to strike out at somebody. They
were going to show who was in charge. A very
effective technique for a group that wants to form
a rebellion in this country is to personalize the
police. Start calling them at home. Start leaving
something in their mailbox on their doorstep. And
I'll guarantee you, you will get a violent police
reaction when you do that. Yes, that's a lot of
wine. Thank you very much, Dr. Hoover. No problem,
Steve. You really did do a good job.